# CS224U-Final-Project
Predicting the gender of a character based on words spoken to them in a movie
Madhu Karra and Gita Krishna 

Analysis of movie dialogue spoken to a character reveals important elements of gender biases in society. Elements of social norms are revealed through analysis of words spoken to a character. In movies, a large part of how characters are perceived is how other characters interact with them on screen. Thus, conversational exchanges are key to revealing implicit linguistic biases in the vocabulary directed at men and women respectively. For this project, we will be focusing on the way that other characters implicitly gender a character through linguistic biases. In other words, we hope to find certain elements of language that are directed towards females only or males only, giving us some insight into gender roles and norms. In order to create a system that can train on large data sets of movie dialogues and learn linguistic biases, we created a feed-forward neural network as a deep learning model.


Gender-specific natural language processing has the potential to answer questions regarding psychological and sociological elements of our world. We propose a neural-net-based method for learning implicit stereotyping of male and female characters in movies. We hope to look into how the dynamic exchange of conversation sheds light on particular character traits or aspects of a character’s identity relating to their gender. Specifically, the way that other movie characters treat a particular character influences viewers’ judgment of the character. Thus, a movie that has deeply rooted gender stereotypes in its dialogue can reinforce these societal stereotypes. For this reason, we believe that our work is valuable and relevant. Many scholars have studied sentiment and gender bias in films, but we found few applications involving deep learning models. Rather, a vast majority of these applications consisted of more simple classifiers such as Naive Bayes, Gaussian, Multinomial, Logistic Regression, and such. Although it was shown possible to achieve a relatively high prediction accuracy with these tools, we think that a neural network could be more powerful because of its ability to learn nuanced features from training data and predict on unseen test data. We expect that we will be able to discover elements of bias that have not been discussed in-depth in other works and learn from them. Moreover, most of the previous approaches that we found looked into dialogues between char- acters of different genders or character monologues to find gender-specific language. Our focus is on speech directed at a character. Although previous methods have set a respectable baseline for predicting gender in movies with natural language processing tools, we believe that our focus on words directed at a character rather than spoken by the character, as well as our deep-learning approach, distinguish our work. Our focus is not so much on how characters portray themselves, but rather on how other characters come together to create a gender-specific image of a particular character. For our work, we focus on all the lines spoken by any other character to a particular character. Thus, we do not focus on specific conversations or conversational partners. We expect that taking all characters’ depictions of a particular character will be more revealing. We used Cornell movie dialogue data that
we parsed appropriately to feed into our neural network. This data set has been used widely by various other scholars, and provides an abundance of information about each movie and its dialogues.
